---
layout: post
title:  "Paths Towards Collective Intelligence (WIP)"
date:   2016-10-06 16:00:00 -0400
categories: essay
---

We live in an era of the Internet, a communication protocol that connects humans to a collective network. It is a tool that alerts, entertains, and manipulates those who connect to it. It can be closed and open, safe and dangerous, centralized and decentralized, entertaining and rational. It is not just a systematized network serving a single authority, nor does it always serve the democracy’s best interest. It is a network that metaphorically resembles a battlefield, a thunder storm, a tidal cycle, and an alerted swarm. The Internet is not just a technologic system, it is an extension of the human nature — humanized into something natural, emotional, and erotic. Even if the Internet entirely relies on machines that follow materializing laws of logic, us humans transformed it into an interface for satisfying our desires, emotions, and agendas.

Although the internet is a very elaborate technologic feat, it can nevertheless implement a couple tricks that nature harnessed more than a hundred million years ago. These can be found among the processes of ants, bees, and chimps. By looking at their natural collective networks, we will realize how natural selection shaped these networks, which in some respects, turn out to be more efficient and elaborate than ours. The fairest reason for this, is that these natural networks developed naturally, whereas the Internet, is a network that developed artificially. Naturally developed networks become an inherited part of a collective species; not only do these species become “100% compatible” with their network, but they interact with it trough a high bandwidth brain-network interface.

An artificial network such as the Internet, is not a high bandwidth brain-network interface yet. Although we do share information using this network by sending email, photos, live video feeds, etc., we only do so thanks to electronic devices. The Internet as a network becomes entirely useless with the absence of silicone boards and LCD screens. But even when we interact with these devices, we do so by using our slow biological limbs such as hands and fingers. Electronic devices are linked to the internet through a high-bandwidth interface, but humans are not. If we had the ability to interface with the Internet without the use of external devices, we could potentially develop a human collective intellect network. That is, use our individual intellectual capacities to form a collective intellectual network that will allow us to augment our awareness and perception. Such a network however, is not possible without a high bandwidth brain-network interface. The natural equivalent of such a network is already present in ants, but as Internet users, humans have not invented an equivalent yet. We have yet to study and understand the human brain before a brain-network interface is even feasible.

> Let us momentarily consider the protocological mobile phone, where we began this conversation. The mobile device is constantly receiving and sending information across its control channel to its closest cell tower. Now and again, tower and phone exchange packets of data, establishing their connection. This silent transmission is itself like a form of intimacy between devices as they bypass the human as its executive operator! The cell phone processes millions of calculations per second, digitally compressing and decompressing the human voice, reminding us of the complexity, not only of this technical system, but of the human thought and speech that it facilitates, translates, and reiterates. We are aware that our mobile conversations and data flows can be intercepted, stored, and archived, and that our physical passage is tracked by the very device that offers us so much freedom. Yet we must be mindful that we do not lose sight of our humanity in all this talk of the agency of objects and technical systems—that we are still being spoken for and authored, even as we lose ourselves in the sublime elsewhere of endlessly ramifying data streams.[^Mackinnon]

While ants do not posses any form of advanced sociability, nor are they actively aware of every other ant in its colony; they nevertheless posses a mode of *swarm intelligence* which establishes a network with all the other members of the swarm. Humans have established a similar network called the Internet. The Internet however, is not an interface that we posses by nature. It is an artificial trait to which we don’t have a corresponding DNA code that instructs its usage. Ants however have a DNA code that instructs them how to use their pheromone interfaces. We end up using this artificial communication protocol by means that develop arbitrarily. The means by which humans understand the Internet is artificial, we use technologies compromised of silicone boards and LCD screens. These are not sensory augmentations that directly interface with our brain’s cognitive abilities, these are devices that translate the internet’s protocol into a language understandable by our sense of vision.

But when Internet is viewed from a critical perspective, perhaps even considering other creatures that develop a form of *swarm intelligence*, we come to realization that Internet is a very inefficient mode of communication. Ants for example, use pheromones to communicate with other members of the colony similar to the way humans use speech.[^j1] This might seem as as an inefficient mode of communication, but it isn’t. While reacting to these signals, ants use a communication network that allows every member to proactively serve the colony’s collective needs. It is not complex, but it is advanced due to its intimate relation to the brain of every individual ant. Nature is an Emergence mechanism that can develop complex systems out of simple constituent patterns. In a human context, that is the equivalent of responding to collective human treats such as climate change momentarily, or it could be something completely unimaginable. For example, gaining an ability to “feel” a meteor entering the Earth’s atmosphere, or to momentarily feel human disasters without necessarily being effected directly. The collective swarm has a higher form of intelligence than any of its constituent ants. It does so by becoming more aware of its environment, It is a sort of brain where each ant functions as an individual neuron.

*~~The term that defines this collective ability, is widely regarded as the noosphere. The term was first adopted by Vladimir Vernadsky who defined it as a third stage of the earth's development cycle that follows the development of the biosphere (biological life) and the geosphere (inanimate matter). Such a progression will allow humans to become alert of environmental dangers, develop an advance form of cognition, and collectively solve issues that threaten our habitats.  *~~

Although ants are not intelligent on the individual level, they do show collective proficiencies in areas that humans can easily take a few lessons from. **example** But would learning these techniques even be possible without changing the modes of human perception and cognition? How would we take something like the Internet, a system built in a technologic medium, and be able to perceive its bandwidth using biologic interfaces?

To answer this question, it is important to realize that unlike ants, we have not evolved as a collective thinking swarm colony. Humans evolved from primates, a species who’s motivations is self preservation in conjunction with a complex form of sociability traits. Chimpanzees for example, our closest evolutionary cousins, are able to unconsciously hypothesize about the minds of other chimpanzees.[^j2] Humans posses a more advanced form of this social ability. It is interesting to note how autistic individuals lack in these social skills, which can explain the emotional alienation that one finds when interacting with an autistic individual. And yet autistic individuals regularly test higher in general intelligence and often display exceptional talents at math and pattern recognition.[^j3] What this demonstrates is that evolution chose

But what developed as a social ability that determines the mental state of a couple hundred individuals, is now immersed in urban environments consisting of tens of thousands of other individuals. These social traits gained from evolution are no longer designed to function within the abundance of these interactions.

This sociability however, does not extend to the ability for us being able to interact with a swarm of humans. Within the human context of sociability, that would require us to maintain friendships with a million other human beings. We try to improve human swarm logic but evolution has not allowed humans such qualities intrinsically. We follow the instincts of survival that causes us to satisfy our own needs as opposed to collective needs of humanity. The largest scope that we have the ability to regard is on the city scale.

But we did not evolve as a collective thinking colony like ants have. We are based on satisfying our needs and increasing the chances of our survival and the group of people close to us. In collective environments we can accomplish many things thanks to our ability to reason, but in other areas, even ants do things more efficiently and effectively than us. For example, we don't have the percepitory bandwidth to grasp our collective systems such as the internet. Ants release pheromones  as way to communicate with their collective, but we lack such sensing ability to interact with the internet.

So there is this lacking ability in our sensing ability. If we want something like the internet to become a collective sensing medium, we must redefine our biological nature and perhaps even the human anatomy as a whole. There only two options for this:

1. Constructing an Internet perceiving AI
2. Human cyborgization

## Internet Perceiving AI.

## Human Cyborgization

Human cyborgization would enviably become necessary especially if we wanted to control an AI. A computer-brain interface will allow communication and increase our cognitive and precipitory bandwidth. This will make humans more vigilant about their sensory realms on an individual and environmental level, and will increase our perforce in computational tasks that will give us the ability to catch up to the pace of computation.  

[^Mackinnon]: [Love Machines and the Tinder Bot Bildungsroman](http://www.e-flux.com/journal/74/59802/love-machines-and-the-tinder-bot-bildungsroman/)
[^j1]: Johnson, Steven. *Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities, and Software*, 75
[^j2]: Ibid, 172
[^j3]: Ibid, 173

## Bibliography
Johnson, Steven. *Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants,
	Brains, Cities, and Software*. New York: Scribner, 2001. Print.
