---
layout: post
title: "The Wax Tablet in Aristotle's De Anima"
date: "2015-04-20 18:01:44 +0200"
tags: [Greek, Aristotle, philosophy, form, soul]
---

In Book II.1 of _De Anima,_ the meaning behind Aristotle’s metaphor of the wax tablet, is that it is unnecessary to separate the being-at-work-staying-itself of a _soul_ from an object’s _form_[^1] (412b7). In the context of the wax tablet, there is no reason to question whether its potential to inscribe writings is separate from the _form_ of a wax tablet. The potential to inscribe writings is the _soul_ of the tablet by its _form_ on the other hand, is a ratio and appearance by which the tablet is defined. Or least of all, it is not necessary to separate the wax tablet from its potential to inscribe writings just like it is not necessary to separate an object’s _form_ from the object’s _soul_, or an object’s being-at-work-staying-itself-ness.

[^1]: _Form_ being a certain ratio and appearance that allows an object to be assigned a category based on other objects with similar ratios and appearances.

The reason why the _form_ and _soul_ cannot be separated from a thing or an object is stated very clearly in the following passage where Aristotle explains why a thing becomes “ambiguous” once its potentiality is removed from its _form_ (412b16). Just like the example with an axe, the potentiality of a wax tablet becomes “ambiguous” when its capacity to inscribe is removed from itself. If the wax tablet where to be a human being, the capacity to inscribe would be its _soul_. In this case, if the _soul_ of a human being where to be removed from its _form_, the body of the human being becomes dead. For the _soul_ is also the process of being-at-work-staying-itself by which a living being sustains its life and, if the same was to be removed from a wax tablet, then it would cease the potential to inscribe things.

In Book II.12 of _De Anima_, the context of the wax tablet metaphor takes a different direction since it does not question the tablet’s capacity of inscribing, but rather the potentiality of whatever is inscribed on it. Just like the example where the tablet is used to inscribe the appearance of a golden ring without the ring being golden (424a22); the ring in this case, does have certain attributes of a _form_ which allows it to have certain attributes of a ring, but not the same attributes as a *real* golden ring. If a ring was to be inscribed on a wax tablet, it would have a _form_ of ring but not the capacity of being-at-work-staying-itself-ness of a ring. Therefore, such an inscribed ring will lack a _soul_ of a golden ring, forcing it to exist ambiguously.  

The key differences and comparisons that Aristotle makes with the example of a wax tablet is that in Book II.1, Aristotle claims how objects can exist ambiguously if their _soul_ were to be removed. In Book II.12 however, Aristotle specifically explains how an object or a living being can exist ambiguously when their _form_ is inscribed on a wax tablet. The inscription of an object on a wax tablet can also be applied to any other way of representing and object other than itself. For example, imagination allows us to think of a ring in the same way that a wax tablet is capable of inscribing a ring. Both, the ring that is inscribed and the ring that is being thought of, have a similar lack in potentialities if compared to a real golden ring. This lackness of potentiality is an evident question that Aristotle contemplates when he describes the senses, imagination and eyesight.
