---
layout: post
title: "Science, Technology, Alienation"
date: "2017-01-12 13:32:36 -0500"
---

We live in a world where technologic and scientific advancements shape and establish our understanding about the world. Gone are the days when we would contemplate or guess what the weather would be like the next day; today, such information is accessible at the tip of our fingertips. It is represented by a void of mathematical and symbolic representations that is mediated and measure by technology. These representations of reality are far from natural, but we condition ourselves to trust this form of understanding about the world — as we become less reliant on our natural intuition and careful observation. We no longer rely on contemplation for gaining a broader understanding about our surroundings. Instead, our interpretation about the world relies on algebra, logic, statistics, computation, scientific instruments and hundreds of other 'rational' disciplines.

Weather prediction is a perfect example of how human observation was substituted by mathematical and symbolic representation. Instead of taking a glimpse at the weather outside to predict the weather for tomorrow, we trust information calculated by computers. Statistically of course, such information is more likely to yield a more precise prediction than if we where to trust our natural intuition. We can also come to a common agreement when we refer to these calculations because they have proven to be more correct and pragmatic than our own intuition and/or speculation. By this sort of a pragmatic regard towards knowledge, we manifest a universal correctness and keep it of high regard among the ways we perceive and measure our world.

Even if we one day apply these prediction methods for predicting the weather on Mars, they would very likely turn out to be more precise than a manual prediction. Weather prediction, astronomical observation, particle accelerators, etc. — are all inline with the way we condition ourselves to view the world from a universal point of view. We affirm that this form of correctness is a hallmark of human achievement as it becomes deeply rooted in our world-view.

## Eliminating the Act of Contemplation

Every human motivation is reduced to the principle of utility [^cfa90862] as we condition ourselves to measure what is infinitely large and the infinitely small, we eliminate the act of contemplation from the range of our human activities.[^b16d28c8] physics was transformed into astrophysics, natural science into "universal" science.[^f3bd9ae0] Nietzsche and Bergson describe action in terms of fabrication — which is a direct correlation to why *homo sapiens* might have a better name as *homo faber*.[^712b0164]

As Renaissance revolutionized the world of art, with Leonardo DaVinci, it was clear that a technical revolution would eventually overtake the development of humanity. Today, we see how it is being increasingly overtaken by technology.[^319] But this leaves out the potential for us to view and imagine the world in way, that cannot be perceived non-human intelligence. We have the potential to form our own conception about the world that nobody else had imagined before — from a human-centered point of view.

But the human-centric act of 'contemplation' and 'observation' was substituted by 'doing'.[^bad2a1b8] Even the word 'thought', as we define it according to our modern notions, is alien to the act of *contemplation* defined by Greeks as a mental process which means "an attentive considering, a viewing, surveying". Knowing, is associated with the know-how, which is being increasingly substituted by the act of contemplation. As Plato and Socrates put it, contemplation was "understood as the inner dialogue in which on speaks with himself".[^4bd4172f] It requires one to cease his concern with the objective interpretation about the outer world and nstead, one must engage in a mental process that is *outwardly* inactive, but highly active *inwardly*; as opposed the complete stillness in which truth is revealed to man throughout technology and instruments.

## A World View Trough the Void of Instruments

What is the implication of understanding the world through instruments in a way that is not natural? Throughout the 4 billion year history of life on Earth, we are the first species that is able to understand the world through notations, tools and technologies that we ourselves created. Instruments such as the compass, the telescope and the microscope — are inventions that transformed completely *our* understanding about the world.

It is remarkable how as humans, we where able to completely transform the act of contemplation, to just an act of using, reading, or looking trough an instrument. Up until Galileo Galilei, the Catholic church and much of the rest of the world, believed in the geocentric model that claimed that the Sun, Moon, stars, and planets — all circled Earth. With the help of a telescope, Galileo managed to observe the movement of the Earth in relation to the stars and replace the ancient geocentric model with a modern heliocentric model.

But when we embrace such a way of enquiring and understanding about the world, can it be considered natural? To what extent are we forming an understanding about the world that is no different than how an instrument 'perceives' the world? Hannah Arendt in her novel *The Human Condition*, defines this way of perceiving the world as *alienation*. She argues that *alienation* is one of the most predominant ways of how modern sciences shape the way human perceive their environments which actively shape their condition.[^c2f10daf] The way we condition our world-view through the measurements of scientific measurements is stated well by Arendt:

> The modern astrophysical world view, which began with Galileo, and it's challenge to the adequacy of the senses to reveal reality, have left us a universe of whose qualities we know no more than the way they effect our measuring instruments.[^10db5f0c]

As we manifest this way of perceiving the world, science and technology make us think in terms that are "cosmic and universal", contrary to the one that is "terrestrial and natural."[^d2c33aab] Entire disciplines of knowledge, such as physics and engineering, have already almost lost touch with the spoken human language, and are conveyed solely by mathematical script.[^10db5f1c] Inventions such as algebra are devices of modern mathematics that free us from terrestrial measurements. This process is defines by Arendt a a reduction of "terrestrial sense data and movements into mathematical symbols."[^244cba7e]

Even natural sciences based on terrestrial foundations, like biology, are now being increasingly studied from the perspective of molecular biology, nano-biology, and bio-chemistry; disciplines that are described in notations that are completely alien to terrestrial biology. On the other hand, if we were to one day encounter a form of life that developed on a planet elsewhere, our alienating scientific disciplines would be very much capable of classifying such a marvelous find. But such a way of classification is a process that is done for its own sake as it cannot answer why it is undertaking this particular process.  

On one hand, such a way of understanding about the world is necessary. A well built scientific instrument will yield a precise reading whether it is on Earth, on Mars, or on the opposite side of our galaxy. If humans can build such an instrument of immense capability, there is always a potential for common agreement; perhaps even with an alien species from another planet, which would also base it reasoning on instrument measurements. Instruments are capable of perceiving more universal and objective measurements than what human senses can. But is it necessary to substitute the way we perceive the world to an extent that we understand it in a way that is no different than readings of these instrument? When we perceive the world according to instrument measurements, does that also transform our consciousness and identity?

## The world of machines

The modern sciences ascribe things in terms of objective descriptions while assuming that it is the 'best' or most 'rational' way to look at the world. In fact, we are so obsessed with conceiving the world from a universal-objective view, that we are in the process of building machines that could accomplish the same task. In fact, we are following the path of technologic advancements that make it easier for machines to understand our language while mathematical script is transformed into the computational script of 1's and 0's.

This natural progression of technologic development is what Heidegger would refer to as the state in which the history of mankind becomes more defined by the history of technology, rather than the other way around. There comes a point where humans are no longer the predominant subjects of history. If the way we see the world is being increasingly substituted with instruments and technology, then that means technology — not humans — becomes the main subject of history. This state of humans, as Ardent and Heidegger define as the *human condition*, does not require a takeover by sentient machines or an Artificial Intelligence (AI). It occurs at a more subtle, but nevertheless significant level — it alters the sate of the human condition.

## 'Why?', not 'How?'

Now philosophy is struggling to keep up with scientific and technologic advancements, its importance and influenced had decreased as never before. Whether it is the the discovery of a new particle in physics, it has become an increasingly insignificant to provide a philosophical insight. We no longer pose the old questions "what?" or "why?" which has become substituted by the question of "how?".[^b83ed4e9]

Or more so, contemplation is no longer even possible since the only way humans think about these discoveries is through symbols and mathematical notations, that are alien to act of contemplation. Scientific advancements are increasingly reliant on manufacturing of new tools and instruments. For example, some discoveries would have never made such as if Galileo hadn't had a telescope. The product of human fabrication is the main driver of technological advancements, which in turn is the driver of scientific discoveries, and which in turn, is the historical driver to how we think and perceive the world.

As Arendt puts it, *Vita Activa* is dead and *Homo Faber* won.[^9b452d98] What this ultimately drives at, is that the knowledge about things are no longer objects of knowledge,[^8fc48ca7] but some processes that have happened to happen inside the minds of upright walking apes that currently live on Earth. The most important occurrence that constitutes life; Being was replaced by Process.

Plato believed the leaving things in the realm of theoretic ideas is better than attempting to imitate the image through fabrication.[^e0976831] The ideas are no longer enjoyed for their own sake, but for the sake that they are being fabricated. How often do we hear **brig your idea to life**

[^21adea0d]: Hogan, Craig (2000). "Why is the universe just so?". *Reviews of Modern Physics*. 72 (4): 1149–1161. Retrieved from:[https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9909295](https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9909295)
[^10db5f0c]: Hannah Arendt, *The Human Condition*, p. 261
[^d2c33aab]: Arendt, p.268
[^c2f10daf]: Arendt, p.264
[^244cba7e]: Arendt, p.265
[^4bd4172f]: Arendt, p.291
[^bad2a1b8]: Arendt, p.290
[^b83ed4e9]: Arendt, p.295
[^8fc48ca7]: Arendt, p.296
[^9b452d98]: Arendt, sec.42
[^e0976831]: Arendt, p.303
[^10db5f1c]: Yuval Noah Harari, *Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind*, chapter 7.
[^712b0164]: Arendt, p.313 footnote
[^f3bd9ae0]: Arendt, p.313
[^b16d28c8]: Arendt, p.307
[^cfa90862]: Arendt, p.305
