---
layout: post
title: "Cathedral of Christ the Saviour"
date: "2020-04-05 22:16:20 +0300"
---

The story behind the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour is one of the most fascinating ones, given that its story directly reflects the transformations that occurred in the relation between the state and religion beginning with 19th century Tsarist Russia and spanning way until just recent events, where the Church found its new roots in the constitution of the Russian Federation following the recently approved amendments. The chronology of this very compressed story can be divided into three eras: first, the rise of Cathedral’s spires under Tsarism, then its embellishment in the era of construction of socialism in the USSR era, and finally, the Cathedral’s resurrection in 2002, 11 after the fall of the Soviet Union. 

The story begins with the retreat of Napoleon Bonaparte from Moscow following which, Tsar Alexander I signed a manifesto on 25 December 1812 declaring his intention to build a cathedral in honor of Christ the Savior: “to signify our gratitude to Divine Providence for saving Russia from the doom that overshadowed her”. With Tchaikovsky's premiere of his “1812 Overture” in a tent outside the unfinished church in 1882, the Orthodox Christian Cathedral was consecrated in 1883, just one day before Alexander III was crowned. In total, it took 40 years to construct the Cathedral. During this period, the Cathedral itself served an important political and ideological function; it attributed the victory over Napoleon to the benevolent will of God who supposedly blessed the Tsar in defeating Napoleon, rather than attributing it to the blood and misery of Russian people—mainly conscripted poor peasants—who in conjunction to being forced into exploited by landlords (with The Tsarist family being the wealthiest of the landlords) under feudalism, peasants were also forced to fight Tsarist imperial wars that they had no interests in fighting.

It is precisely with this derogatory view of the relationship between the Tsarist State and Orthodox Christian Church that Russian Marxist revolutionaries agitated the working masses around, leading to a failed revolution of 1905 and then finally, to two successful ones in 1917: the February Bourgeois Democratic Revolution and the Socialist October revolution. This however, was not an altogether unprecedented view regarding religion; in fact, is was derived based on the revolutionary socialist experiment of the Paris Commune in France, where a decree passed on April 2nd, 1871 that proclaimed the separation between the Church and the State; the Church and the institutions of primary education. Following the 1917 Russian Revolution; various anti-religious campaigns were adopted in parallel with propaganda based on the principles of scientific socialism put forward by Marx and Engels which presupposed an atheist world-view called ‘dialectical materialism’. It was believed that world-outlook of historical materialism must be democratized among the masses as it would demonstrate people how what was deemed as a science encompassing the disciplines of political economy, philosophy, and the methodology of theory and practice—under the control and disposal of the people, will bring improvement in their lives more than any religion ever could. It was also believed that once the oppressed peoples of all the world follow the example of Russian workers and peasants in overthrowing their Tsarist and capitalist oppressors, things like nationality, class and religion would progressively become obsolete categories. Thus, religion would be made obsolete just as it would the capitalist system that produces for profit of capital rather than for the needs of the people.

However, the position put forward by Lenin and which more-or-less prevailed way until the dissolution of USSR in 1991, could surprise many by the fact that despite such a negative view of religion, at the same time, discrimination based on religion and other repressive acts was made inadmissible. All religions were allowed insofar they did not interfere with politics, and that the State had no right to interfere or sanction anyone’s religious beliefs. Thus, although it was believed that religion would eventually become obsolete, it was also affirmed that this process cannot occur immediately.


Thus, State and religion were separated to extents that had not ever occurred previously in the history of Christianity, Orthodox Christianity, Judaism and Islam; everyone was free to practice their religion insofar that religion was not used as an instrument of oppression and counter-revolutionary tendencies. As Lenin elaborates in Socialism and Religion:

> “Religion must be declared a private affair. In these words socialists usually express their attitude towards religion…Religion must be of no concern to the state, and religious societies must have no connection with governmental authority. Everyone must be absolutely free to profess any religion he pleases, or no religion whatever, i.e., to be an atheist, which every socialist is, as a rule. Discrimination among citizens on account of their religious convictions is wholly intolerable."

At the same time, religion was deemed to be an instrument of oppression of the ruling class over the ruled toiling masses, especially when religion functions as an instrument of the state:

> “Those who toil and live in want all their lives are taught by religion to be submissive and patient while here on earth, and to take comfort in the hope of a heavenly reward. But those who live by the labour of others are taught by religion to practice charity while on earth, thus offering them a very cheap way of justifying their entire existence as exploiters and selling them at a moderate price tickets to well-being in heaven. Religion is opium for the people. Religion is a sort of spiritual booze, in which the slaves of capital drown their human image, their demand for a life more or less worthy of man.”

The valuable marble was used to decorate three subway stations: “Kropotkinskaya” and “Okhotny Ryad” and “Novokuznetsk”..



Had it been built, it would have been the tallest building until 2004 when Taipei 101 building in Taiwan was completed with a height of 508 meters.   

and to which in some aspects, it returned back to where it begAN.
