---
layout: post
title: "Aristotle's Entelecheia and Potentiality"
date: "2015-04-27 18:11:33 +0200"
tags: [Greek, Aristotle, philosophy, form]
---

In _Physics_, Aristotle defines a _form_ to be a principle with a higher potential compared to matter since each thing receives a name when it exists in actuality rather than when it exists potentially. In order for an object to have a higher potential other than being an ambiguous collection of matter, it is required that it encompasses a _form_. For example, we can recall an object being a “chair” not because of the matter from which it is made but because the _form_ of a chair is known to us. If the form of a chair where to be absent, we would then fail to assign the word “chair” to matter regardless of whether it is a shape made out of wood or a shape made out of plastic.

Even matter, whether it is “plastic” or “wood”, requires a _form_ for it to be defined instead of it existing as an ambiguous type of substance. Interestingly enough, this illustrates the endless chain of hierarchical necessity for something to have a _form_ in order to define something that of which it constitutes. In this case, tree fiber constitutes wood, and wood constitutes a chair. Aristotle claims that a final cause of something cannot exist if its formula fails to work. If individual parts that constitute an Egyptian pyramid would fail to encompass a _form_, the structure would collapse momentarily. For the individual parts that constitute a pyramid may turn out to be marble balls that would scatter all over causing the pyramid to collapse unless the _form_ “stone block” is assigned to the individual bricks which constitute the pyramid.

In _De Anima,_ Aristotle transforms this notion of _form_ into the _soul_ of living beings. The _form of living beings starts to have a slightly different context if compared to a _form_ of a physical object. Living beings have individual functioning parts that allow the body as a whole to be an actuality while remaining dependent on its individual parts from which it consists, such as organs. It is then a question that Aristotle tries to pursue in _De Anima_ on whether it necessary to inquire about the individual parts of the _soul_ or inquire just about the _soul_ as a whole. Aristotle accepts that the wholeness of all the individual parts and organs that constitute a living being, encompass a _form_ within the body that in return, constitutes the whole _soul_ of a living being. This constitution is what actualizes the actuality of “living” in any living being otherwise without this constitution, a being would just be a “being” without the liveness.

Before going deeper into the definition of actuality, it is first necessary to define how this notion falls into the physical world. Potentially in general, signifies that something has the potential _to be_ but is not yet actualized. The potential for actualization is something that inscribes an object to posses a _ἐντελέχεια_ within it by a _chance_. Since potentiality by definition, signifies that something can be in a certain status by a chance, it is first necessary to define how a _chance_ works in universal principles that Aristotle defines in the _Physics_.

Some things that come to be by a chance, come to be for the sake of something however others do not. Nevertheless, all chances are products of some _choice_. Some chances come to be because of their parent cause, that of which it being constituted of. The final cause of any chance belongs to thought or nature. For nature, perhaps is the brute fact of everything and the _soul_ is what allows a body to be more connected to this brute fact and nature itself. So a body without a _soul_ has a lower potential to become an actuality but a body with a _soul_ becomes actualized and therefore becomes an actuality. In return, the body with a _soul_ becomes closer to the more divine and natural of _being_. It is contemplated that _chance_ and potentiality are products from something that is divine and most natural whether it is something godlike or a divine principle. So it is carried out that the actuality of a _soul_ entitles an object to exist at a higher level when compared to an object that exists potentially or without a _soul_.

After defining actuality in physical terms, it is possible to define what actuality is in terms of _ἐντελέχεια_ and being-at-work-staying-itself which is introduced in _De Anima_. The example of the wax tablet is a perfect explanation of how something with potential, whether by _chance_ or a _form_, can become an actuality. A drawing of a chair on a wax tablet actualizes the _form_ of a chair in certain terms that define a _form_ of a chair. Although a drawing of a chair does not have the same properties of a real chair, it has certain aspects that make it more actualized than being just a potential.
