---
layout: post
title: "The Cultural Deus ex Machina"
date: "2017-06-27 23:44:43 +0200"
tags: [art, culture, capitalism, individuality]
---

As Nietzsche's famous dictum in his *The Birth of Tragedy* goes, "it is only as an *aesthetic phenomenon* that existence and the world are eternally justified".[^3] If art dies, then so does the way we look at our world and existence: nothing is no longer eternally justified, and becomes secularized – *dead*. And here we are, living in a dead world; where everything called "aesthetically pleasing" – is a rotting dead corpse: an arrangement of matter, that spreads through our deceasing global culture.

To demonstrate the determinations of modern consumer global culture, and the way we are easily persuaded to mask our reality with an Apollonian idea. Nietzsche makes a great analogy, of how when we forcefully attempt to gaze at the sun, we see dark spots in front of us as we turn away blinded.[^1] These dark spots in front of our vision, are, as it where, "cures". By analogy, when we look at an image of, say a Sephora commercial depicting a overly photoshopped lady, or a perhaps even a transexual, holding a new lipstick product; we contrast this image with the figure that we see in front of our mirror, and think how gruesome we would continue looking if we *won't* buy the product depicted in the illusory commercial (and even re-consider our sexuality on the side).

This is the Apollonian image of our culture, that is not just a figure of Cara Delavigne, but thousands of other models lined up during Fashion Week shows – like the ones you may find in a brothel. These models just blindly claim they support various equalities, different body types, anti-discriminations, etc. – all while contradicting themselves. The contradiction comes when millions of people will be living according to their illusory images, seeking to reach their ideal of freedom, only to realize how much they where enslaved by their illusory idea, as we learn from *Requiem for a Dream* (2000).

To triumph what the moral order imposed by the Apollonian and Dionysian images, our culture has returned to a state where it degenerately expresses it primordial individuality.[^2] This perhaps may be explained by the fact that we no longer feel comfortable with a moral order imposed by a Nazi *deus ex machina*, that dictates how the living matter of the human body must be arranged, what aesthetic judgement it must have, and what non-"degenerate"[^n1] art it must create. Our liberal world is frightened by the idea of such an order, while it fails to recognize that it has become submissive to something more-or-less equivalent – the global capitalist *deus ex machina* – where even the means of art production have been indisputably ceased from the proletariat; where individuality is a naive fantasia; and where culture is just a mass of programmable automata, waiting to be programmed by Facebook and Netflix.

Our society welcomes the expression of individuality, where soon instead of sex an gender, we will have a hermaphrodite, a biologic body that is able to self-reproduce, and embrace any form of individuality based on how the global capitalist *deus ex machina* programs it – the epitome of a Quere! – right? The individuality will be happy regardless, naively claiming it expressed its individuality and gender through its own agency when in fact; its agency was ceased beforehand, and is now determined by quantifiable quanta – this is the simplification and reduction of individuality that humans are subjecting themselves to.

[^1]: Nietzsche, *The Birth of Tradegy*, sec. 9
[^2]: Nietzsche, *The Birth of Tradegy*, sec. 20
[^3]: Nietzsche, *The Birth of Tradegy*, sec. 5

[^n1]: (German: *Entartete Kunst*) – A term adopted by the Nazi regime in Germany to describe Modern art. (see [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degenerate_art)) It is important to note the Nietzsche had alluded to *degenerate art* – among numerous other ideas – half-a-century earlier than the Nazi's eluded to their terms. Nietzsche is sometimes dismissed as a provoker of Nazi thought, but those who claim so, unlikely have the mental capacities to comprehend his thought in an Absolute form; contrary to a dissected, labeled, fragmented reading of one the greatest philosophic minds. Thought this also has to do with improper translation of Nietzsche into the English language.
