---
layout: post
title: "Hegel's Master-Slave Dialectic "
date: "2017-08-06 10:43:37 +0200"
tags: [Hegel, dialectic, capitalism, freedom, idealism, nature, philosophy]
excerpt: "A brief explanation of Hegel's master-slave dialectic"
---

Hegel, conceived an individual as a self-consciousness, a self-distinguished 'shape' who is part of a 'unity' consisting of all other living beings that together compromise nature as a whole. Within this unified unity of nature, arises other individualities, or what he calls 'shapes' — which are all the other self-consciousnesses aside from our own. Each of these self-conscious individualities have their own biological needs, as well as objects of Desire, which the self-conscious is determined to fulfill. Typically, a self-consciousness is determined to fulfill its *Desire* through the consumption of an *Object*, but a more fulfilled Desire is achieved when an individuality consummates[^note1] another individuality, as an object of *its own* possession.

In *Phenomenology of Spirit*, Hegel bases his dialectic on this simple and abstract tension among multiple 'shapes' of self-conscious individualities, which together compromise a 'unity' — the totality of life as a whole. Throughout human history, we can see how this act that consists of the consummation of other individualities, progressed from a mere barbaric act of consuming another individuality (through the act of killing, torture, rape, et cetera); into a more elaborate process in which the labour belonging to other individualities is exploited (through slavery, wage-labour, debt, bondage, dependance, et cetera); and then, finally, coming to a progressive end, where laws and morality that defend the right to freedom — are established in a state where the individual is finally liberated. This progressing struggle, is what is known as Hegel's *master-slave* dialectic, or in his own words: lord (landlord, master, etc.) and bondsman (serf, slave, etc.) relation. The ultimate historical development of human consciousness, consists of this complete freedom and liberation from these master-slave bondages, which include: slavery, debt, bondage, dependance, et cetera.

[^note1]: The words 'consume' and 'consummate' both work well to describe when an individuality seeks to fulfill its desire in another individuality. To consummate, means to "realize and achieve" ones Desires and ends, but it also describes the "first act of sexual intercourse that people have after their ceremony". Both of these contexts work quite well when it comes to possessing another individuality — the foundation of patriarchy and misogyny, as well as class societies.
